Ruth, were you or your sisters ever sick out of the
mines? No, sir. With malaria or anything? No, sir.
Were any of the other families? No, sir. Anything
but that. I see. So the doctor didn't come out there
very often? Yes, sir. He did or did not? No, he come
to the houses. I see. Just to check you over? Yes,
sir. To see the patient. I see. And did you have to
pay for that visit or did Mr. Goodman? Yes, sir. He
has to pay every one. Do you
remember how much he had to pay? About three
dollars every time he came to the house.
Do you remember the name of that doctor? Dr.
Barkley.
You said that you met your husband when you were Oh,
between 28 and 32. Yes, sir. At the nursing home.
Right. And then you got married, and then you moved
here to Rockdale? Yes, sir. And then what did you do
together, you and your husband? Well, I still work
in an arrest home, and my husband, he have a nice
job. And I built a new house, me and my husband. You
and your husband built this house? Yes. From
scratch? Right. Did friends come over and help you
at all? No, sir. Just the two of you? That's right.
And you didn't have Raymond and Junior to help you?
Raymond, he helped a little bit, yes. Where did
your husband pick up the ability to build a house?
Because he worked in the railroad. He worked in the
railroad. Yes, sir, and he gave us this. Did your
husband come from Mexico? No, sir, my husband...
Waco. From Waco. Yes, it's our own town. Were his
parents from Mexico? No, sir. Waco. And he
finished the school in Waco.
When You said you did not go to school at all. Yes.
Because my mother, she didn't have the money to
send me to school. Sometimes I cried because I
asked her for other reasons. She didn't want me to
go to school. She said, daughter, I don't have the
money for you to go to school. So the miners, the
mining people had to pay the school to send their
children to school. Yes. Were some of the miners
children's? Able to go to school? Yes. I see. Do you
remember where that school was? In Rockdale. In
Rockdale. Okay. Well, how did you learn your
English? I mean, you talk very good English. Well,
I started to miss a lot of friends, and I started to
learn. You picked it up from the children who were
going to school? Yes. I see. Yes. Did... Your
father, Joe Mendoza, was from Mexico. Yes, sir.
And... Hello. Good evening. Howdy. How do you do?
Pretty good. Moving right along here.
He was from Mexico, and he was a boss man at mines.
Yes, sir. Did he... You know, I asked you this
before, if he... kept up some of the old ways from
Mexico? Yes, sir. What kind of things did he do? Did
he retain the same religion, for instance? No,
sir. He never changed anything. He never changed
anything from Mexico? No, sir. Was he a Catholic in
Mexico? Yes, sir. I see. Are you a Catholic now?
Yes, sir. I see. And all my family. OK. Do you
remember any of the other miners that changed from
Catholicism to another church? No, sir. No, sir.
Because we've gotten reports that some of them
became Baptists, but everybody at the Boniva mine
remained. Yes, right. Did you have a church at the
mining camp? No, sir. He came to town.
The priest came from town? Yes, sir. And you held
church at the mining camp? Yes, sir. Did you hold it
outside? Yes, outside. I see. What would happen
when it was raining or cold? Did you just not have
church? That's right. He don't have it.
One thing I forgot when we were talking about
feeding, what kind of food that you had, were you
able to get a supply of milk at all? Yes, sir. Did Mr.
Panera have cows there? Yes, sir. He had cows. He
sold the milk. He sold the milk? Yes. I see. Do you
remember how much he told you? No, sir.
Did you ever hear your father, Joe Mendoza,
complain about working in the mines? No, sir. I
never hear anything. What was his attitude toward
Mr. Benever? Did he get along with Mr. Benever?
Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Right. Okay.
Did you get married in Rockvale? Yes, sir. I'm
married in Rockvale.
Do you remember any weddings out at the mine camps?
You know, other people getting married there? No,
sir. I don't remember anything. Let me
just sort of wrap this up. I pretty much asked you
everything I wanted to. How do you remember the
mines? You say that sometimes you sit back and just
think about the mines when you take Raymond or
Junior to town. And you're buying them clothes and
stuff. And it's a much different lifestyle,
better lifestyle than what you had. What do you
think about the mines along those lines? Yes,
that's why the reason I remember. Because I don't
have what he had. And that's why I remember. What
kind of feeling does it give you? Well, an awful
feeling. An awful feeling? You feel pretty bad
about it? Yes. But I guess you feel good that you and
your husband have been able to... Oh, yes, because
my family, he has what I don't have. I see.
How's...
You know the way I make the bowls to play me and my
brothers and my sister? Oh, you made little bowls
to play with? Yes, to play. You know the way I make
it? No, how did you do that? I steal some rags to my
mother. You took some rags? Uh-huh. And I started
to make it, me and my brothers and my sister. And I
steal some sacks to my mother. Oh. And look at this
one, he has two or three paws over there. Yes, that
she bought at the store. Now you see that? Now, you
wanted to tell me how you made cornbread, and you
wanted to do it in Spanish because you felt like you
could explain it better. Yes. Okay. So this is how
you and your mother made cornbread out of limes,
right?
I'll be able to understand some of
it now. Got a little bit. Go through the process of
how you made the cornmeal. Was cornmeal fairly...
Did you eat cornmeal a lot? Uh-huh. In every meal?
Uh-huh. Pretty much? Okay. So did your mother
taught you how to make the cornmeal? He told me the
way he cooked, but I never learned. You never
learned it, okay. But you know the description of
it. You want me to start? Yeah, sure, go ahead. Just
go on. Tell us how your mother made the cornmeal.
It's
so funny. Do you speak Spanish? Yes.
Well,
I'm going to start it in my own language. She cooked
it, she ground it in the mortar. And she made
tortillas for the family. And she washed it in the
mill before. She did her chores in the house. Y
este, todo el día ella se preocupaba por su
familia. Y planchaba con planchas de mano. La
calentaba en la estufa. ¿En la estufa? ¿Qué
estufa? ¿Stove? ¿Stove? ¿Un stove? Sí. Y un ratito
que tenía ella de descanso, se ponía a tejer, a
hacernos ropa. Y arreglar la ropa para mi papá, mis
hermanos.
Ella trabaja mucho en estos lugares. Le cocinaba
al señor Guniver, le hacía tamales, enchiladas,
cuando él pedía.
Y de esa manera pasaba nuestra vida nosotros.
Yeah, I got some of that. You stand up. Muchas
gracias.
My daddy, he started to make dances in the houses
and he come a lot of people and have a good time. And
the dances, he stop about one o'clock and
everybody go home. So people would come from
Rockdale to the dances? Yes. I see. Was that
usually on the weekends? No, every Saturday.
Every Saturday. Yes. And, well, everybody had a
good time. For the license, yes. Oh, that's all
right. And, well, nothing happened.
I think, do you remember hearing a story about a
Model T falling down one of the mine shafts? I
remember that real good, but my daddy, he talking
about that. He did? Yes. What did he say about it?
No, I don't remember anything. Was there ever any
contact between the Boniva camp and the other
camps? Did you know people that worked at the other
mines? No, sir. I don't remember that. One thing I
noticed when we were walking over the mines last
week was that at the Boniva mine, the railroads
seemed to be fairly far away from where the miners
lived. Is that true? Yes, sir. Right. Did the
railroads keep you up at night? No, sir. I couldn't
hear anything. Because at some of the other mines,
the camps were closer to the railroads. Yes, sir. I
understand that. No, I never hear anything. Did
you ever see Mr. Ginniver yourself, or did you just
hear about him? No, sir. I have years and years I
never see him. Somebody else told me he saw him in
San Antonio. I see. And I never tried to go there and
see him. I don't know if he still lives or not. Well,
I think he's passed away. You said that you had a
table and two chairs, and yet you had your mother,
your father, and your sisters. When you ate, did
your mother and father sit in the chairs and you sit
on the beds? Yes, or sometimes,
yes.
Right. Did you have any chores that your mother had
you doing during the day? Nothing.
Did you have to weed the garden or anything? Yes,
sometimes.
Did anybody ever come through the camp selling
watermelons? Yes, sometimes. Some people would
come over there. He was selling nickel. Were you
all ever able to buy that? Yes,
sir. Did any of your friends at the mines meet their
husbands or wives at the mines and get married?
There were different families living at the mine.
Was a daughter from one family ever marry a son from
another? Yes, there's a lot of families. And yet,
you went all the way to Waco to meet your husband.
Yes, sir. That's kind of unusual, I guess. We met in
the hospital. You met in
the hospital? I see. Do you keep in contact with any
people that you grew up with at Des Moines? Yes,
sir. Where do they live now? He live in Rockdale,
Miss Mireles. Morales? Joe Mireles. Jose?
Mm-hmm. And Tomas, Manu, Campos. Did they all live
in Rockdale? Yes, sir. He still lived. Where did,
not everybody from the mine stayed in the Rockdale
area when they shut down, did they? No, sir.
Somebody left the Waco. Waco. Did they go anywhere
else?
Well, I can't think of anything else. I mean, we've
covered all the food and the clothes and
everything like that. So, muchas gracias por
tiempo. Gracias también.